---
title: "Cosmos Network"
slug: "cosmos-network"
---

Cosmos is a network of networks. The Cosmos SDK is an open-source framework for building the application layer of Proof-of-Stake blockchains. Blockchains built with the Cosmos SDK are generally referred to as application-specific blockchains. Cosmos blockchains utilize the Tendermint Core for networking and consensus. Additionally, Cosmos introduced the inter-blockchain communication (IBC) protocol for trust-minimized bridging between blockchains.

Cosmos SDK based blockchains are built out of composable modules. Blockchain developers create customized business logic in new modules and integrate with the provided modules from the Cosmos SDK. The Cosmos SDK includes pre-built modules for actions such as minting new tokens, setting a gas fee, staking tokens and much more. The Cosmos thesis is often referred to as the app-chain thesis. Application-specific blockchains are customized to operate a single application. Instead of building a decentralized application on top of an underlying blockchain like Ethereum, developers build their own blockchain.

Ethereum pushed the boundaries of blockchain technology with the introduction of a state-machine that incorporated a virtual machine (EVM) that is able to interpret turing-complete programs called Smart Contracts. These smart contract also inheret the constraints of the virtual machine itself. For example, the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) does not allow automatic execution of code and developers are limited to the account-based system of the EVM. These are some examples of the lack of flexibility that a smart contract environment often entails. On top of the limitation of the the VM, these smart contracts compete for block space. Last but not least, smart contracts operating in a general purpose virtual machine blockchain are superseded by the governance of the underlying blockchain. If there is a bug in a non-upgradeable smart contract, very little can be done about it.

Cosmos SDK blockchain use the Tendermint Core for networking and consensus. Tendermint Core is an application-agnostic engine that is responsible for propagating and ordering transaction bytes. Tendermint Core relies on the Byzantine-Fault-Tolerant (BFT) algorithim to reach consensus on the order of transactions. Tendermint passes transactions to the application through an interface called ABCI. Transactions must pass a validation checks to be included in the mempool of a full node and relayed to peer nodes. When a block of valid transactions is received by the Tendermint Core, each transaction is passed to the application to be processed. At the beginning and end of each block arbitrary application logic may be executed, creating automatic code execution.

IBC is a cross-chain messaging protocol for homogenous blockchains. This means that it connects chains that share similar functionalities, in this case, instant finality provided by the Tendermint consensus algorithm and ones that have light client functionality. Two chains passing messages between one another require a light client of the opposing chain. Relayers then pass information betweene the light clients. The trust relies on the two validator sets of the connected blockchains, rather than the typically significant trust assumptions with multi-sig bridges.
