# Optimistic Rollups

Rollups work in an execution environment which is considered “off-chain” because, well, everything is processed not on the blockchain. Instead of processing all transactions on the blockchain, a Sequencer (a computer) computes transactions and batches them in groups. In our architecture, dYmension compatible rollups write the transaction data (in a compressed form) to a data availability layer, while publishing the new state on the settlement layer. This reduces the efforts of each validating node participating in the network. Now each computer doesn’t need to process every transaction. As such, by moving the computational efforts off-chain, nodes with less computational power can keep up with high amounts of information re-processing and participate in the consensus of the network.

This design assumes an optimistic view towards the honesty of the sequencers, hence the term optimistic rollup. Meaning that it’s initially assumed the sequencer who is processing these transactions is acting honestly. However, in order to produce an environment where users of a network do not have to simply trust sequencers, a dispute period is installed. This period enables others to verify that the sequencer is reporting correct state updates. If anyone discovers a batch that is not correct, they can publish a “fraud proof” demonstrating the correct state transition. If indeed the sequencer provided incorrect information the state of the blockchain is reverted and the sequencer is “slashed” (they lose tokens they’ve bonded to participate in the network). Optimisitic design requires only O(1) data in state for O(N) off-chain transactions to be stored on the settlement layer.

A pre-requisite for submiting a fraud proof to the settlement layer is that all of the data was made available when the block was published. This means that for every state transition all of the associated data was published, but not necessarily processed. This allows different confidently verify the state is valid and submit any fraud proofs if there is a transaction included by the Sequencer that does not pass the application logic. If a Sequencer included a magic (but fraudulent) transaction that minted them a bunch of token the data availability would guarantee this transaction was included in the published block and a fraud proof can then be submitted by any actor demonstrating the invalidity of the specified transaction.

This unique integration of data availability guarantees and a dispute period for fraud proofs allows users to be confident that the application's Sequencer is acting honestly and no invalid transactions are being included. Furthermore, this design enables dYmension to hyper-scale blockchain applications. In dYmension's protocol, each application receives its own designated rollup environment and the settlement layer handles any fraud dispute, inter-connectivity with other applications and security.
